# A Tour of Computer Systems

## Information is Bits + Context

- **All Information is represented as bits**
- **The only thing that distinguishes different data objects is the context in which we view them**

### Example

The file [hello.c](hello.c) is stored as a sequence of bytes (8-bit chunks) in the disk. When this file is opened by a text editor, the bytes are interpreted as ASCII characters and displayed as text.

If we tried opening the same file in a different context (say, as an image viewer), the bytes would be interpreted as pixel values and the program would try to display an image (although odds are the program would not be able to display anything and would treat the file as corrupted).

We can visualize the hexadecimal representation of the file using the following command:

```bash
# Writes the hexadecimal representation of the file to a file ascii_representation.txt
xxd -p hello.c | tr -d '\n' | sed 's/../& /g' | sed 's/ *$//' | fold -w 24 > ascii_representation.txt
```

We can also visualize the binary representation of the file using the following command:

```bash
xxd -b -c 8 hello.c | awk '{print $2$3$4$5$6$7$8$9}' | tr -d '\n' | fold -w 64 | awk '{gsub(/.{8}/,"& "); print}' > binary_representation.txt
```

The results of these commands can be found in the [ascii_representation.txt](ascii_representation.txt) and [binary_representation.txt](binary_representation.txt) files.

### About C

C is the language of choice for system-level programming because it is a small, simples language closely tied with the Unix operating system.

- **C is a small language**: C has a small number of keywords and constructs, making it easy to learn and use. The K&R book (Kernighan and Ritchie) is less than 300 pages long, and describes the entire language and standard library.

- **C is close to the machine**: C provides low-level access to memory and the CPU, making it an ideal language for writing system software. Also the data types and operators in C are closely related to the underlying machine instructions and how data is stored in memory.

Nowadays, many programmers fear C because of the misconception that it is a complex language, but it is a simple language (even easier if you already have experience with another programming language).

The first chapter of the book "The C Programming Language" by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie has enough information to get you started with C (keep in mind that the book was written for the C89 standard of the language, and quite old, so there are outdated stuff on it, but it is a great book the get started with C anyway).

## Programs are Translated by Other Programs into Different Forms

### Topics

- The steps of compilation
  - Preprocessing
  - Compilation
  - Assembly
  - Linking

- How to compile a program
  - `gcc -o hello hello.c`

### Visualization of the intermediate files generated by the compilation process

The following command generates the intermediate files generated by the compilation process:

```bash
# Preprocessing: Generate hello.i
gcc -E hello.c -o hello.i

# Compilation: Generate hello.s
gcc -S hello.i -o hello.s

# Assembly: Generate hello.o
gcc -c hello.s -o hello.o

# Linking: Generate hello (executable)
gcc hello.o -o hello
```
